https://www.wsj.com/podcasts/whats-news/why-israel-is-waiting-to-invade-gaza/8c3938ec-fdc4-49bb-a3de-e7036c7d54c5

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2023
10/27/2023 5:57:00 AMShare This Episode
Why Israel Is Waiting to Invade Gaza
A.M. Edition for Oct. 27. Israel says it is holding off on a ground invasion of Gaza until the U.S. can place air defenses in the region. But with that potentially finished within days, could we soon see a major escalation? WSJ Middle East bureau chief Michael Amon explains the factors driving Israel’s decision. Plus, Amazon’s profit triples, fueling its efforts to compete in the AI battle to come. Luke Vargas hosts.



FULL TRANSCRIPT
This transcript was prepared by a transcription service. This version may not be in its final form and may be updated.

Luke Vargas: The US strikes targets in Syria to deter Iran and its allies from joining the Mideast conflict. We'll look at Israel's calculus as it weighs a Gaza offensive.

Michael Amon: There are questions about whether Israel has a real game plan for what happens after they defeat Hamas. And there's also political calculations from the prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. He's led the country for a long time, but he has never fought a very long war.

Luke Vargas: And Amazon's profit triples, but to keep up in the AI battle to come, it will need that winning streak to continue. It's Friday, October 27th. I'm Luke Vargas for the Wall Street Journal, and here is the AM edition of What's News, the top headlines and business stories moving your world today. Let's begin in Gaza. Fuel is running out in the enclave with the UN's Agency for Palestine Refugees saying that more is urgently needed to keep vital humanitarian operations running. Israel cut off all supplies of food, water, fuel, and electricity to Gaza following Hamas' October 7th attacks. And while it has allowed in small amounts of Aid since last Saturday, it opposes fuel deliveries that it says Hamas could use for military purposes, a concern echoed by US state Department Spokesperson Matthew Miller.

Matthew Miller: Israel has very real concerns about the diversion of fuel. Hamas continues to launch rockets, and so Israel has real concerns. And so we are trying to work through a mechanism to ensure that we can get fuel in in a way that would not be diverted so it could be used only for humanitarian purposes.

Luke Vargas: Aid groups are warning of a complete blackout across Gaza as it's more than two million people are under intensifying airstrikes by Israel. Meanwhile, the US launched strikes on a pair of bases in Syria overnight that it said were used by Iranian groups. The strikes are the first by US forces in the Middle East this month and come as the Pentagon shifts troops and military assets to the region to deter Iran and its proxies from widening the Israel Hamas conflict. Israel has thus far held off on a potential ground invasion of Gaza until US defenses are assembled, but with US and Israeli officials saying that that's possible within the next several days, could we soon see a major escalation? Michael Amon is the Wall Street Journal's Middle East Bureau Chief. Michael, within hours of Hamas' October 7th attack, we were hearing about a possibly imminent Israeli offensive in Gaza. Nearly three weeks later now, there have been two stated reasons for a delay: to buy more time for hostage negotiations and to let the US military get assembled. Are those the real reasons at play here?

Michael Amon: Those are major reasons why the delay is happening. In fact, even using the word delay is potentially a misnomer. There are some within Israel who are saying, "We're going to go in when we want to and how we want to, and there may be reasons for it to take this long." The reasons you stated, buying more time for hostage negotiations, that is a major issue in Israel and for the United States. There are a lot of American citizens inside Gaza right now who are being held hostage, and within Israel, the families of the hostages are putting a lot of pressure on the government. The US is also trying to get a lot of hardware into the region, but there are questions about whether Israel has a real game plan for what happens after they defeat Hamas. There's also political calculations from the prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. He's led the country for a long time, but he has never fought a very long war. He's been very cautious about going to war in the past. So there's a lot of deliberations and back and forth inside the Israeli government right now.

Luke Vargas: Given especially the US strikes on Iranian targets in Syria overnight, concern about Iran's proxy in Lebanon as well, Hezbollah, getting involved here, escalation could come from multiple sides. Do we see signals of those groups being eager, poised to escalate further?

Michael Amon: I think that they are trying to show that there is a price for the US to be building up in the region and they're trying to give the US a taste of what it means to be involved in a conflict between Iranian proxies and Israel. And there's a lot of deterrence going on on both sides. Iran is trying to deter the US from getting involved by having its proxies attack US bases, and the US is trying to deter Iran from getting more involved with its military buildup and these airstrikes from overnight.

Luke Vargas: Finally, Michael, while it may ultimately be Israel's call as to whether to launch a Gaza offensive, the rest of the world is certainly making its opinions known. Jordanians are set to protest today in solidarity with the Palestinians. The UN General Assembly, we expect, will vote as well on a resolution calling for a ceasefire. Is any of that or other international pressure having any bearing you see on this?

Michael Amon: It is having some bearing in the sense that you see Israel this time trying to build a Western alliance to support its war. It's had to do that because of the intense nature of what it's planning to do in Gaza, which is it's a much bigger operation than they planned in the past. Their stated war aim is to destroy Hamas, and that will have the potential to inflame the region. So they have not only the US on their side, but they've also made a point of building bigger ties with France, Germany, the UK. All of those leaders have either visited Israel or sent support. Israel has never had to do that before. They've always fought their wars alone, and now they're being forced to build a bigger alliance because there is a lot of international pressure for them to stop. But also that helps keep countries that were moving toward better relations with Israel like Saudi Arabia, like the United Arab Emirates, which already has relations with Israel, mostly the Gulf, in a position where they can straddle these two worlds and not fall totally on the anti-Israel side.

Luke Vargas: Michael Amon is the Wall Street Journal's Middle East Bureau Chief. Michael, thank you so much for the update.

Michael Amon: Thank you.

Luke Vargas: Coming up, Amazon's e-commerce business is cooking, but is it enough to fund its AI ambitions and keep it competitive in the cloud? We've got that story and much more after the break. Amazon delivered its Q3 earnings last night. The results? A tripling of profit from July to September. Cloud computing sales were up as were ad and retail sales. So what did Amazon get so right, especially amid a high profile antitrust suit, e-commerce competition and inflation? Dan Gallagher is a Journal Heard on the Street tech columnist. Dan, these results beat analyst expectations. Amazon stock jumped more than 5% off hours and it was more than retail driving this, right?

Dan Gallagher: Well, this is actually the highest operating profit they've ever earned, like over $11 billion just for the quarter. But what was interesting was that the stock started going down after the report hit because also within the report was their cloud business, AWS. The revenue growth there actually fell a little bit below expectations. It was flat with the last quarter. And because AI is such a dominant theme this earnings season, we saw it over at Microsoft and over at Google earlier this week, there was concern that Amazon's somewhat weak cloud growth meant that their AI business wasn't really taking off. But then during their conference call, their CEO, Andy Jassy gave some interesting color about how the cloud business was actually doing. It's coming out of these customers that were trying to watch their bills, and deal signings were picking up, and you actually saw the stock change from a 3% decline to a 5% gain during the course of this call. And since I was listening to this call while writing my column on it, I had to rethink, "Okay. How is the Street taking this news in?"

Luke Vargas: And Dan, it sounds like there's a similarity here between Amazon and Alphabet in which their core businesses really just need to maximize all of their potential profits in order for them to be able to sink billions and billions into these expensive AI projects of the future.

Dan Gallagher: Absolutely. And I think Amazon actually has the biggest obstacle in that sense because their core business, retail, which is most of their revenue, is very thin profits relative to, if you look at Microsoft, business software, if you look at Google, online advertising, those are very profitable businesses. Their cashflow is much higher than Amazon. Microsoft and Google generate between 60 and 80 billion in free cashflow annually, and Amazon's more the low 20 billion range. So, Amazon really has to play this cloud game pretty smart because they're a very big company. They have a lot of resources. Obviously, the retail side is doing well, and going into the holiday season, that's a good quarter for them. But compared to the two companies they're competing most directly against, they almost look like an underdog, which is really interesting.

Luke Vargas: That was Wall Street Journal Heard on the Street tech columnist Dan Gallagher. Dan, thanks so much.

Dan Gallagher: My pleasure.

Luke Vargas: Ford is downshifting its EV plans and warning investors on the effects of labor strikes. While the automaker saw strong pickup truck sales in the third quarter, it withdrew its yearly guidance and predicted that a Union Auto Workers strike would dent operating profits by $1.3 billion. The company also pushed out $12 billion in planned electric vehicle investments, including delaying a second battery plant in the US, citing consumer demand concerns and pricing pressure from competitors. Ford president Jim Farley.

Jim Farley: A great product is not enough in the EV business anymore. We have to be totally competitive on cost.

Luke Vargas: Apple is facing a potential import ban on certain models of its smartwatch after a US federal trade agency found that the tech giant violated the patent of a rival tech company, Masimo. The complaint from Masimo to the US International Trade Commission relates to a sensor measuring blood oxygen levels called a pulse oximeter and which features in most new models of the Apple Watch since 2020. The Biden administration has 60 days to overrule the Trade Commission's decision. Apple said it would appeal, adding that the decision wouldn't have an immediate impact on watch sales. China's top diplomat is in the US today. Foreign Minister Wang Yi met with Secretary of State Antony Blinken yesterday afternoon, and he could get time with President Biden today. And atop their possible agenda, his planning for a potential meeting between Biden and Xi Jinping that could take place as early as next month. Brian Spegele is the senior Journal correspondent in our Beijing bureau. Brian, US-China relations, where are they now? Are they in a place where a meeting could be possible? Just a few months ago we were talking about spy balloons. Tensions really couldn't have been higher.

Brian Spegele: Yeah. We're in a slightly more stable place now than we were just a couple of months ago. But as you mentioned, this is an incredibly complicated relationship that spans technological competition, military competition, economic and trade competition. So there's a number of areas that the United States and China are really locked in this fierce competition for the future over. But at the same time, I think there's a recognition on both sides, a desire to seek stability, greater predictability in the relationship, and I think that's what's driving them together right now.

Luke Vargas: And yet despite some single steps forward, it always seems like there's just such a range of issues where we could see two steps or more back.

Brian Spegele: Yeah, that's right. And even just as we speak right now in the South China Sea, we're seeing heightened tensions between China and the Philippines, which is a US security ally. The US would be required to go to the Philippines' defense if the tensions that we're seeing right now between China and the Philippines were to escalate into conflict. Even just today, we're seeing reports of a Chinese fighter jet flying very close to a US B-52 bomber over the South China Sea. So these are incredibly dangerous encounters that we're seeing with one another. So we'll have to watch how that plays out. But I think what's important to note is that both sides are trying to bring down the temperature. They are trying to create the conditions that diplomacy might be possible going forward, and we'll have to see whether that's possible. And I think that's what Foreign Minister Wang Yi is trying to suss out in Washington right now.

Luke Vargas: That was Journal senior correspondent Brian Spegele in Beijing. Brian, thanks.

Brian Spegele: Thank you.

Luke Vargas: China's former premier Li Keqiang, who served as the Communist Party's second-highest official from 2012 to 2022 has passed away at age 68 following a heart attack. Once considered China's possible next leader, Li's efforts to retool the country's economy faltered under the dominance of Xi Jinping. An official obituary has not been issued yet, with the delay suggesting that the Communist Party may not have been prepared for his sudden death. And the average wealth of Americans has reached a new milestone, surpassing $1 million last year. That is a 42% increase from 2019. And according to the Fed's Survey of Consumer Finances, wealth inequality has also narrowed, with Journal Numbers columnist Josh Zumbrun telling us it's not just the extremely rich that are doing well.

Josh Zumbrun: The real winners when it comes to wealth have been the upper middle class. People that earn 150 to $250,000 saw their wealth grow very dramatically over the last three years. It's now the case that about 12% of American families are millionaires. There's still a lot of inequality out there between different racial groups, but one of the things you see really clearly in this data is the age gap. It's actually very common when you get into your fifties or sixties. About 20% of people in that age overall are millionaires, and it's even higher when you look at the group of people that are college graduates.

Luke Vargas: And that's What's News for Friday morning. Today's show was produced by Mohsin Ali and Kate Bullivant. Our supervising producer is Sandra Kilhof with additional help today from Chris Zinsli. I'm Luke Vargas for the Wall Street Journal, and we will be back tonight with a new show. Otherwise, have a great weekend, and thanks for listening.